1
Single-cell type profiling of fetal kidney tissue
Santhosh Rajakumar
Programme name – Master’s in Bioinformatics
Course: Research training (1MB841) 15 hp 2024-2025
Department of Immunology Genetics and Pathology, Dr Cecilia Lindskog group , Uppsala
university, Uppsala, Sweden
Project Supervisor: Cecilia Lindskog, Loren Méar
2
1. ABSTRACT
The fetal kidney, a dynamic site of nephron formation known as nephrogenesis, makes an
ideal model for studying protein expression during human development. This study aimed to
map protein expression in fetal kidney tissues and compare it to adult kidney tissue using a
multi-omics approach that integrates transcriptomics and antibody-based proteomics. Bulk
mRNA sequencing data were analyzed from fetal kidney samples to identify genes with
significantly higher expression levels compared to adult kidney tissue. The functional roles of
these genes were validated through Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, which
highlighted key biological processes associated with kidney development. Protein
localization and expression patterns were further examined and confirmed using
Immunohistochemistry (IHC).
2. INTRODUCTION
The kidney is a vital organ responsible for maintaining homeostasis by regulating blood
composition, including water balance, electrolyte levels, and pH. It plays a critical role in
excreting metabolic waste products and organic compounds. (Habuka, Fagerberg, Hallström,
Kampf, et al., 2015). The fetal kidney undergoes a dynamic and tightly regulated process of
development, marked by cellular differentiation and organogenesis. As the site of
nephrogenesis, where functional nephrons are formed, the fetal kidney serves as a unique
model for studying the protein expression driving kidney development.
Human kidney development begins during the first three months of pregnancy and progresses
through three stages: pronephros (around weeks 3–4), mesonephros (around weeks 4–8), and
metanephros (beginning around week 9 and continues throughout fetal development).
Among these, the pronephros and mesonephros are transient structures that form and then
subsequently regress, while the metanephros evolves into the functional kidney. Each stage
represents a critical phase in the transformation of primitive structures into fully functional
kidneys, which play a vital role in maintaining fluid and electrolyte balance and excreting
metabolic waste (Rosenblum et al., 2017).
The Human Protein Atlas (HPA) project stands out as a groundbreaking initiative for
mapping all human protein-coding genes. The remarkable advancements in proteomics and
transcriptomics have fueled global efforts to map human genes with unprecedented
resolution, exemplified by HPA(Thul et al., 2017). It offers a comprehensive database
integrating spatial antibody-based proteomics with transcriptomics technologies, accessible at
(www.proteinatlas.org).
The HPA has made significant advancements in proteomic research, particularly in adult
tissues, targeting over 80% of the ~20,000 protein-coding genes in the human genome
Despite these advancements there are hundreds of proteins that are not detected in any of the
tissues or cell types based on mRNA, and we hope that some of these may be expressed in
fetal tissues (Uhlén et al., 2015), (Karlsson et al., n.d.).
This study seeks to systematically map protein expression in fetal kidney tissue by integrating
transcriptomic data analysis with antibody-based proteomics approaches to shed light on the
3
cell type-specific localization of proteins that are uniquely expressed or overexpressed in fetal
tissues compared to adult tissues, providing a unique opportunity to address critical gaps in
our knowledge of the human proteome and uncover valuable insights. The findings will help
enhance our understanding of protein expression in kidney development and identifying
biomarkers specific to fetal kidney development.
3. AIM
The aim of this project is to identify and prioritize relevant protein targets specific to fetal
kidney tissue by leveraging a multi-omics approach. This involves the comprehensive
analysis of transcriptomics data to uncover gene expression patterns unique to the fetal
kidney, followed by the integration and validation of these findings with antibody-based
proteomics data.
4. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the workflow for identifying fetal kidney-specific
proteins.The data is analyzed to identify genes that are elevated in fetal tissues compared to
adult tissues. Candidate proteins are selected and validated using antibody-based proteomics
approaches. Finally,IHC is performed to validate protein expression within fetal kidney
tissue, enabling spatial localization and confirmation of findings.
4.1 Dataset Description
This study utilized bulk mRNA sequencing data provided by HPA, derived from frozen tissue
samples of fetal kidneys collected at two developmental time points: week 15 and week 18.
The mRNA sequencing was conducted using Illumina HiSeq2000 and 2500 platforms
(Illumina, San Diego, CA), adhering to the standard Illumina RNA sequencing protocol
employed by the HPA for all normal tissue samples (Wang et al., 2009). Gene expression
levels in these samples were quantified as normalized transcripts per million (nTPM), a
standard metric for comparing transcript abundance across samples. The samples were
obtained through collaboration with the biobank infrastructure at Mount Sinai Hospital. In
addition to the fetal kidney data, adult kidney gene expression profiles were obtained from a
combination of HPA and Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project datasets. These adult
datasets were integrated to create a unified resource for comparative analysis. It is important
to note that the RNA sequencing data were derived exclusively from frozen tissue samples
4
curated by the HPA. In contrast, paraffin-embedded tissue samples used for
immunohistochemistry were obtained from different individuals, ensuring optimization of
assays for their respective methodologies.
4.2 Data Processing and Bioinformatics Analysis
4.2.1 Data Structuring
To facilitate direct comparison between fetal and adult tissue expression datasets, the data
structures were carefully transformed and standardized ensuring compatibility. The analysis
focused on identifying expression patterns and differences in gene expression between fetal
tissues at weeks 15 and 18 compared to the adult tissue. To enable comparative analysis, the
data structure was transformed from a long to a wide format. This restructuring was essential
for organizing nTPM values into a format suitable for side-by-side comparisons across the
adult and fetal tissues. In the adult tissue expression data, gene identifiers were standardized
to match the format used in the fetal dataset, allowing seamless integration of the two
datasets.
4.2.2 Comparative Analyses
Comparisons between fetal tissue expression and adult consensus levels were performed by
calculating the ratio of average fetal kidney expression to adult kidney consensus expression
highlighting genes with differential expression patterns between them.We also focused on the
two fetal kidney samples representing distinct developmental stages. Expression ratios were
calculated between these samples to quantify differential expression dynamics between week
15 and week 18, provided insight into genes that might drive stage-specific developmental
processes in the fetal kidney.
A extensive literature review was conducted to identify well-established marker genes
specific to fetal kidney tissues. These marker genes along with their associated cell types
information were incorporated into the dataset providing a resource for subsequent analyses.
Summary metrics such as consensus distribution and maximum expression were included to
provide additional context for gene expression patterns. Several binary columns were added
to the dataset to flag genes with ratios exceeding a predefined threshold of two, including
ratios such as fetal kidney to adult kidney expression and comparisons between fetal weeks
15 and 18 . These binary indicators enriched the dataset by highlighting genes with
significant tissue-specific expression patterns which help in refining the list of potential
protein targets.
4.2.3 Validation
The Annotated Protein Expression (APE) score, developed within the HPA project, provides
a high-confidence estimate of on-target protein expression. This score uses two or more
antibodies targeting non-overlapping epitopes on a single protein. By integrating staining
patterns, published literature, expression data, and bioinformatic predictions, the APE score
enhances the reliability of protein expression analysis.
The Protein Existence (PE) score, metric for validating protein expression in cells and tissues,
provides evidence confirming the actual detection and presence of a protein within a tissue
based on experimental data. As highlighted, this data is primarily derived from the UniProt
database (www.uniprot.org), a comprehensive resource containing both manually reviewed
5
and automatically annotated protein sequences. Protein existence data from the HPA
LIMS database and APE scores were integrated into the dataset to validate the candidate
genes.
To understand the functional roles of the genes, the ClusterProfiler package (v4.14.4) and the
org.Hs.eg.db package (v3.2.0) was used to perform Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis
(Wu et al., 2021). Biological process (BP) was the sub-ontology applied to retrieve
comprehensive GO term information. The results were adjusted for multiple testing using the
Benjamini-Hochberg method (pAdjustMethod = "BH") and filtered for significance with a qvalue cutoff of 0.2. Throughout the analysis, data visualization techniques, including
summary tables, were generated to depict gene expression patterns. Gene expression patterns
were visualized using scatter plots generated with the ggplot2 R package (version 3.5.1).
4.2.4 Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Automated immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed for both adult and fetal tissue
samples to see protein expression patterns, employing the Autostainer 480 Instruments (Lab
Vision, Fremont, CA). This process was strictly done to the standardized protocols
established by the Human Protein Atlas (HPA), which include optimized incubation times,
and washing steps to maximize specificity and minimize background staining. The dilution
factors were optimized or each antibody to ensure the best possible staining and detection
during the IHC process. Following the IHC staining procedure, high-resolution digital images
of the stained slides were acquired using the Scanscope AT2 slide scanner (Aperio, Vista,
CA), equipped with a 20× objective lens. This advanced imaging system ensured accurate
image of tissue morphology and staining patterns at a cellular resolution.
4.2.5 Code availability
The analysis was conducted using R (version 4.4.1) using various bioinformatics
packages.The scripts used for data processing have been uploaded to my GitHub repository
https://github.com/SanthoshRajakumar/Human-protein-atlas-project and are available upon
request.
5. RESULTS
The dataset derived from bioinformatics analysis of fetal and adult kidney tissues, comprised
of 20,163 genes, which were filtered using specific criteria to identify potential candidates for
further analysis. Six separate lists were created based on distinct selection parameters detailed
in Table 1.
Once the genes were selected in each sheet, further refinement was performed. For a gene to
be considered for final analysis, genes that were expressed highly in fetal kidney tissue
compared to adult and had evidence from HPA LIMS (laboratory information management
system) confirming RNA expression in kidney tissue were prioritized. Genes that were
expressed in fetal kidney tissue but showed RNA expression in tissues other than kidney were
also considered. Genes that exhibited high intensity staining in adult kidney tissue were
excluded, as no significant difference in expression was expected in fetal kidney tissue.
6
Sheet APE
reliability
score
Cell type/Gene Expression criteria Protein existence No of
genes
1 High and
Medium
Gene- no
known
gene/celltype
were included
Overexpressed in
fetal kidney
compared to adult
tissue
Experimental
evidence at
transcript level,
Protein inferred
from homology
6
2 High and
Medium
Gene- no
known
gene/celltype
were included
Overexpressed in
early fetal kidney
tissue compared to
late fetal kidney
tissue
Experimental
evidence at
transcript level,
Protein inferred
from homology
38
3 High and
Medium
Gene- no
known
gene/celltype
were included
Overexpressed in
late fetal kidney
tissue compared to
early fetal kidney
tissue
Experimental
evidence at
transcript level,
Protein inferred
from homology
34
4 High Gene-Included
known
gene/celltype
Overexpressed in
kidney compared to
adult tissue
Not applicable 18
5 High Gene- Included
known
gene/celltype
Overexpressed in
early fetal kidney
tissue compared to
late fetal kidney
tissue
Not applicable 18
6 High Gene- Included
known
gene/celltype
Overexpressed in
late fetal kidney
tissue compared to
early fetal kidney
tissue
Not applicable 12
Table 1- The table summarizes the gene selection criteria and the number of genes identified
for further analysis based on expression and reliability parameters. Each sheet corresponds
to a specific combination of these parameters.
The data analysis identified a total of 2,355 genes with significantly higher expression levels
in fetal kidneys compared to adult kidneys, filtered based on a threshold ratio of fetal to adult
expression greater than 2. These genes are active in kidney development during the fetal
stages, showing distinct expression profiles that are significantly less expressed in adult
kidneys.
7
In week 15, a wide range of genes with high expression was observed, as seen by numerous
outliers with extremely high nTPM values in the scatter plot (Image 1). In contrast, week 18
displayed fewer genes with extremely high nTPM values compared to week 15, suggesting a
continuation of developmental activity during the later fetal stage.

Figure 2. A scatter plot illustrating the comparison of Consensus Kidney (nTPM) values,
representing adult kidney expression levels (x-axis), with fetal kidney expression levels at
week 15 (blue points) and week 18 (red points) (y-axis).
Figure 3. Visualizing enrichment results using ggplot2- A lollipop chart to visualize the top
20 most significant GO terms on p-value.
In figure 2 green points represent adult kidney samples plotted against themselves, serving as
a reference for consistency. The plot highlights differentially expressed genes across the adult
and fetal kidney stages, emphasizing transcriptional differences important to renal
development.
The top 20 most significant GO terms were selected based on adjusted p-values. These terms
were visualized in a lollipop plot (Image 3) that highlighted the rich factor (calculated as the
8
ratio of genes in the cluster associated with a GO term to the total number of genes associated
with that term), adjusted p-value (represented by a color gradient from red to blue), and gene
count (indicated by the size of the points). The plot provided a clear depiction of the enriched
biological processes, focusing on the most significant terms with higher gene representation
and lower adjusted p-values.
Key findings included specific developmental processes such as axonogenesis, renal system
development, muscle organ development, and regulation of neuron projection development,
indicating their critical roles in the biological systems under kidney development. The
lollipop plot effectively summarized these results, providing a comprehensive overview of
the enriched biological processes and their relevance to kidney development.
After filtering and selecting the most relevant genes for fetal kidney tissue analysis, the
following genes were identified as the ideal candidates.The antibodies were carefully selected
to target proteins that are expected to show specific expression patterns in fetal kidney
tissues. The details of the selected genes, antibodies, and their respective concentrations are
in Table 2.
ENSG ID Gene name Antibody ID Volume (ul) Dilution
ENSG00000131747 TOP2A CAB002448 641 1:30
ENSG00000149294 NCAM1 HPA039835 348 1:75
ENSG00000116183 PAPPA2 HPA018412 204 1:50
ENSG00000100373 UPK3A HPA018415 338 1:250
ENSG00000105668 UPK1A HPA049879 316 1:35
ENSG00000164363 SLC6A18 HPA011885 326 1:450
Table 2- The table summarizes the ideal candidates along with their HPA ID, dilution and
volume.
The dilution of each antibody was optimized based on strict validation criteria taking into
consideration the expected staining pattern based on available literature as well as correlation
between RNA expression levels and protein expression levels. Before performing IHC on
fetal kidney tissues, the antibodies used for detecting target proteins were first validated for
reliability and specificity. The validation process involved testing the antibodies on adult
kidney tissue to ensure they effectively recognize the proteins of interest. This step was
crucial for confirming that the antibodies would yield reliable results when used on fetal
tissue. High-resolution digital images were obtained through slide scanning, and the resulting
images are presented in figure 5.
9
 ADULT FETAL WEEK 15 FETAL WEEK 18





TOP2A PAPPA2 UPK3A NCAM1 UPK1A
10
Figure 5. The IHC images highlights the expression of TOP2A,
PAPPA2,NCAM1,UPK3A,UPK1A across adult kidney(left), fetal kidney at 15 weeks(centre),
and fetal kidney at 18 weeks(right).
6. DISCUSSION
Through transcriptomic data analysis, we identified 6 key protein targets specific to fetal
kidney tissue. These 6 findings, validated through IHC, provide important insights into
expression profile and functional roles of these proteins during kidney development. The GO
enrichment analysis further validated these findings, revealing biological processes involved
in kidney development, including cell proliferation, morphogenesis, and extracellular matrix
organization. Using antibody-based resources from HPA and the genes which we found as
markers from the extensive research from literature helped in localizing proteins within
specific cell types.
An important outcome of this study is the identification of proteins uniquely or highly
expressed in fetal kidneys but absent in adult tissues. The first three proteins show such
expression. TOP2A gene encodes a nuclear enzyme a DNA topoisomerase that controls DNA
topological structure, chromosome segregation, and cell cycle progression.(Panvichian et al.,
2015). In the adult kidney, the staining of the TOP2A protein is weak and scattered within a
small subset of cells, likely within their nuclei, indicating low expression of TOP2A. In
contrast to the adult kidney, expression in fetal kidney week 15 is more intense within
developing glomeruli and tubules, which are regions of active growth and differentiation. In
fetal kidney week 18, the staining remains intense but demonstrates a more localized
distribution compared to week 15 reflecting transition from widespread proliferation to more
targeted cellular growth as the kidney matures.
PAPPA2 is a metalloproteinase known to modulate insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
availability by cleaving IGF-binding proteins, thereby regulating cell proliferation and
differentiation (Barrios et al., 2021). Its elevated expression in the fetal kidney tissue aligns
with its role in promoting mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition and nephron formation.
PAPPA2 expression is mostly in developing nephron structures especially above the
glomeruli, they look like developing distal tubule like structures, indicating its potential role
in early nephrogenesis. This can be seen in both the development stages , where there is no
expression in adult kidney , thereby correlating with the transcriptomic data that we analysed.
NCAM1 encodes a cell adhesion protein involved in cell-to-cell interactions as well as cellmatrix interactions during development and differentiation. It plays a role in the development
of the nervous system by regulating neurogenesis. This protein plays a role in signal
transduction by interacting with fibroblast growth factor receptors (Buzhor et al., 2013).
NCAM1 expression in the adult kidney is faint but strong in the fetal kidney, with
cytoplasmic and membranous staining localized primarily to proximal and distal tubules.
Developing glomeruli and tubular structures involved in signaling are the sites of active
morphogenesis , where we can see strong expression of NCAM1,emphasizing its critical role
in nephron formation.
UPK3A and UPK1A encodes proteins which contributes to the structural integrity and
regulating bladder membrane permeability (Habuka, Fagerberg, Hallström, Pontén, et al.,
11
2015). Its expression is highly tissue-specific, as seen by its presence in the urinary bladder
and ureter-like structures in the fetal kidney. These proteins were observed to be expressed in
urinary bladder tissue but absent in adult kidney tissue. Interestingly, while bulk RNA
sequencing data suggested expression in fetal kidney tissues, the IHC results highlighted the
protein's expression in urinary bladder tissue, highlighting the importance of combining
antibody-based imaging with RNA sequencing data for validation.
Despite the significant findings, this study has certain limitations. The use of bulk mRNA
sequencing may overshadow the contributions made by specific cell types. Single-cell RNA
sequencing and expanded datasets on other fetal tissues could address this limitation in future
enhancing our understanding of fetal proteome.
In conclusion, this research highlights the importance of mapping the fetal proteome for
understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying human development and the unique
proteins expressed during fetal development.The findings of this project will contribute to a
more comprehensive understanding of the human proteome, offering insights into protein
function during early kidney development.
7. REFERENCES
1. Barrios, V., Chowen, J. A., Martín-Rivada, Á., Guerra-Cantera, S., Pozo, J., Yakar,
S., Rosenfeld, R. G., Pérez-Jurado, L. A., Suárez, J., & Argente, J. (2021). PregnancyAssociated Plasma Protein (PAPP)-A2 in Physiology and Disease. Cells, 10(12).
https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10123576
2. Buzhor, E., Omer, D., Harari-Steinberg, O., Dotan, Z., Vax, E., Pri-Chen, S.,
Metsuyanim, S., Pleniceanu, O., Goldstein, R. S., & Dekel, B. (2013). Reactivation of
NCAM1 defines a subpopulation of human adult kidney epithelial cells with
clonogenic and stem/progenitor properties. The American Journal of Pathology,
183(5), 1621–1633. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.07.034
3. Habuka, M., Fagerberg, L., Hallström, B. M., Kampf, C., Edlund, K., Sivertsson, Å.,
Yamamoto, T., Pontén, F., Uhlén, M., & Odeberg, J. (2015). The Kidney
Transcriptome and Proteome Defined by Transcriptomics and Antibody-Based
Profiling. PLOS ONE, 9(12), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0116125
4. Habuka, M., Fagerberg, L., Hallström, B. M., Pontén, F., Yamamoto, T., & Uhlen, M.
(2015). The Urinary Bladder Transcriptome and Proteome Defined by
12
Transcriptomics and Antibody-Based Profiling. PLOS ONE, 10(12), 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145301
5. Karlsson, M., Zhang, C., Méar, L., Zhong, W., Digre, A., Katona, B., Sjöstedt, E.,
Butler, L., Odeberg, J., Dusart, P., Edfors, F., Oksvold, P., von Feilitzen, K., Zwahlen,
M., Arif, M., Altay, O., Li, X., Ozcan, M., Mardinoglu, A., … Lindskog, C. (n.d.). A
single–cell type transcriptomics map of human tissues. Science Advances, 7(31),
eabh2169. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abh2169
6. Panvichian, R., Tantiwetrueangdet, A., Angkathunyakul, N., & Leelaudomlipi, S.
(2015). TOP2A amplification and overexpression in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues.
BioMed Research International, 2015, 381602. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/381602
7. Rosenblum, S., Pal, A., & Reidy, K. (2017). Renal development in the fetus and
premature infant. Seminars in Fetal & Neonatal Medicine, 22(2), 58–66.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.siny.2017.01.001
8. Thul, P. J., Åkesson, L., Wiking, M., Mahdessian, D., Geladaki, A., Ait Blal, H., Alm,
T., Asplund, A., Björk, L., Breckels, L. M., Bäckström, A., Danielsson, F., Fagerberg,
L., Fall, J., Gatto, L., Gnann, C., Hober, S., Hjelmare, M., Johansson, F., …
Lundberg, E. (2017). A subcellular map of the human proteome. Science, 356(6340),
eaal3321. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal3321
9. Uhlén, M., Fagerberg, L., Hallström, B. M., Lindskog, C., Oksvold, P., Mardinoglu,
A., Sivertsson, Å., Kampf, C., Sjöstedt, E., Asplund, A., Olsson, I., Edlund, K.,
Lundberg, E., Navani, S., Szigyarto, C. A.-K., Odeberg, J., Djureinovic, D., Takanen,
J. O., Hober, S., … Pontén, F. (2015). Tissue-based map of the human proteome.
Science, 347(6220), 1260419. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1260419
13
10. Wang, Z., Gerstein, M., & Snyder, M. (2009). RNA-Seq: A revolutionary tool for
transcriptomics. Nature Reviews Genetics, 10(1), 57–63.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2484
11. Wu, T., Hu, E., Xu, S., Chen, M., Guo, P., Dai, Z., Feng, T., Zhou, L., Tang, W.,
Zhan, L., Fu, X., Liu, S., Bo, X., & Yu, G. (2021). clusterProfiler 4.0: A universal
enrichment tool for interpreting omics data. The Innovation, 2(3).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xinn.2021.100141
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION:
I. Background, where, when, and for how long.
Research training at the Department of Immunology Genetics and Pathology,
Dr Cecilia Lindskog group , Uppsala university, Uppsala, Sweden, supervised
by Cecilia Lindskog and Loren Méar, took place from November 1st to
January 10th. This computational study was conducted under the direct
guidance of the supervisors in the lab.
II. Describe the central activities of your workplace.
Progress meetings on Thursday were conducted to review project
advancements and analyze results. Additionally, zoom meetings offered
diverse perspectives on problem-solving approaches for finding relevant
candidates.
III. Description of personnel, methods, equipment, and possible research
results. (kindly refer to the materials and methods and results section of the
report)
IV. A short description of a common work day.
Daily tasks involved data segregation, cleaning and analysis as per the
schedule. Utilizing R for data visualization guided subsequent analyses and
determined research directions.
V. A short description of group meetings, literature seminars, etc.
14
Meetings with Cecilia and Loren, and other research assistants helped in
resolving data analysis and visualization challenges while enhancing
comprehension of the biological aspects underlying computational work.
VI. Briefly summarize your theory task
Initial training involved a two-week literature survey to grasp the research's
background.
VII. References to publications or similar. (refer to references section of the
report)
VIII. Self-assessment of your experience during the research training.
Utilizing R for data analysis and visualization seemed challenging at first, but
improved as the training progressed. I gained some experience on analysis of
data of transcriptomics and a bit of proteomics data , which I will definitely
use in my master thesis.
IX. What worked well and what could have been done better?
(kindly refer to discussion section of the report)
