The final dataset comprised approximately 20,163 genes, which were filtered using specific criteria to identify potential candidates for further analysis. Six separate lists were created based on distinct selection parameters detailed in Table 1.
Once the genes were selected in each sheet, further refinement was performed. For a gene to be considered for final analysis, Genes that were expressed highly in fetal kidney tissue compared to adult and had evidence from HPA LIMS(laboratory information management system) confirming RNA expression in kidney tissue were prioritized. Genes that were expressed in fetal kidney tissue but showed RNA expression in tissues other than kidney were also considered. Genes that exhibited high intensity staining in adult kidney tissue were excluded, as no significant difference in expression was expected in fetal kidney tissue. 
Sheet	APE reliability score	Cell type/Gene	Expression criteria	Protein existence	No of genes
1	High and Medium	Gene-NA	Overexpressed in kidney compared to adult tissue	Experimental evidence at transcript level, Protein inferred from homology	6
2	High and Medium	Gene-NA	Overexpressed in early fetal kidney tissue compared to late fetal kidney tissue	Experimental evidence at transcript level, Protein inferred from homology	38
3	High and Medium	Gene-NA	Overexpressed in late fetal kidney tissue compared to early fetal kidney tissue	Experimental evidence at transcript level, Protein inferred from homology	34
4	High	Gene-Include all except NA	Overexpressed in kidney compared to adult tissue	Not applicable	18
5	High	Gene-Include all except NA	Overexpressed in early fetal kidney tissue compared to late fetal kidney tissue	Not applicable	18
6	High	Gene-Include all except NA	Overexpressed in late fetal kidney tissue compared to early fetal kidney tissue	Not applicable	12

Table 1- The table summarizes the gene selection criteria and the number of genes identified for further analysis based on expression and reliability parameters. Each sheet corresponds to a specific combination of these parameters.

The data analysis identified a total of 2,355 genes with significantly higher expression levels in fetal kidneys compared to adult kidneys, filtered based on a threshold ratio of fetal to adult expression greater than 2. These genes are active in kidney development during  the fetal stages, showing distinct expression profiles that are significantly less expressed in adult kidneys.
In week 15, a wide range of genes with high expression was observed, as seen by numerous outliers with extremely high nTPM values in the scatter plot (Image 1). In contrast, week 18 displayed fewer genes with extremely high nTPM values compared to week 15, suggesting a continuation of developmental activity during the later fetal stage.
                           Figure 2                                                                     Figure 3
                   
Figure 2. A scatter plot illustrating the comparison of Consensus Kidney (nTPM) values, representing adult kidney expression levels (x-axis), with fetal kidney expression levels at week 15 (blue points) and week 18 (red points) (y-axis). 
Figure 3. Visualizing enrichment results using ggplot2- A lollipop chart to visualize the top 20 most significant GO terms on p-value.
In figure 2 green points represent adult kidney samples plotted against themselves, serving as a reference for consistency. The plot highlights differentially expressed genes across the adult and fetal kidney stages, emphasizing transcriptional differences important to renal development.
The top 20 most significant GO terms were selected based on adjusted p-values. These terms were visualized in a lollipop plot(Image 3) that highlighted the rich factor (calculated as the ratio of genes in the cluster associated with a GO term to the total number of genes associated with that term), adjusted p-value (represented by a color gradient from red to blue), and gene count (indicated by the size of the points). The plot provided a clear depiction of the enriched biological processes, focusing on the most significant terms with higher gene representation and lower adjusted p-values.
Key findings included specific developmental processes such as axonogenesis, renal system development, muscle organ development, and regulation of neuron projection development, indicating their critical roles in the biological systems under kidney development. The lollipop plot effectively summarized these results, providing a comprehensive overview of the enriched biological processes and their relevance to kidney development. 
After filtering and selecting the most relevant genes for fetal kidney tissue analysis, the following genes were identified as the ideal candidates.The antibodies were carefully selected to target proteins that are expected to show specific expression patterns in fetal kidney tissues. The dilution factors were optimized for each antibody to ensure the best possible staining and detection during the IHC process.The details of the selected genes, antibodies, and their respective concentrations are in Table 2.

ENSG ID	Gene name	Antibody ID	Volume (ul)	Dilution
ENSG00000131747	TOP2A	 CAB002448	641	1:30
ENSG00000149294	NCAM1	HPA039835	348	1:100
ENSG00000116183	PAPPA2	HPA018412	204	1:50
ENSG00000100373	UPK3A	 HPA018415	338	1:250
ENSG00000105668	UPK1A	 HPA049879	316	1:35
ENSG00000164363	SLC6A18	 HPA011885	326	1:900

Table 2- The table summarizes the ideal candidates along with their HPA ID, dilution and volume.
The dilution of each antibody was optimized based on strict validation criteria taking into consideration the expected staining pattern based on available literature as well as correlation between RNA expression levels and protein expression levels. Before performing IHC on fetal kidney tissues, the antibodies used for detecting target proteins were first validated for reliability and specificity. The validation process involved testing the antibodies on adult kidney tissue to ensure they effectively recognize the proteins of interest. This step was crucial for confirming that the antibodies would yield reliable results when used on fetal tissue. High-resolution digital images were obtained through slide scanning, and the resulting images are presented in figure 5.











            ADULT                           FETAL WEEK 15                FETAL WEEK 18              
       
        
       
         
       
Figure 5. The IHC images highlights the expression of TOP2A, PAPPA2,NCAM1,UPK3A,UPK1A across adult kidney(left), fetal kidney at 15 weeks(centre), and fetal kidney at 18 weeks(right).
